ops: jobs: new jobs docs (#784)
inveniosoftware/docs-invenio-rdm: docs/maintenance/internals/jobs.md

- No standardized logging or audit trail.
- Hard to expose jobs to administrators.
- No unified way to track execution history or outcomes.
- No parameterized job execution from the UI.

The job system addresses these problems by introducing two core concepts:

- **Jobs**: registered task definitions with metadata and optional schemas.
- **Job Runs**: execution instances of a job, which are persisted and tracked.

---

## Architecture Overview

### Core Components

- **JobType (Base Class)**:
  Defines the interface for a job: `id`, `title`, `description`, `task`, `arguments_schema`, and `build_task_arguments`.

- **Celery Tasks**:
  Implement the actual logic. Must be registered as entry points and referenced by the JobType.

- **Job Registry**:
  Discovers jobs via entry points (`invenio_jobs.jobs`).

- **Job Runs**:
  Persisted database entries that track execution, status, timestamps, logs, and arguments.

- **Admin UI**:
  Provides a scheduling form, status view, and log viewer for each job.

- **REST API**:
  Enables programmatic triggering, listing, and status inspection of jobs and runs.

---

### Scheduler Beat

> Scheduled and on-demand job execution requires a **custom scheduler beat**, which is expected to be implemented and deployed by the user. This beat is responsible for dispatching job runs, whether triggered manually or on a schedule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scheduled and on-demand job execution requires a **custom scheduler beat**, which is expected to be implemented and deployed by the instance manager/developer. This beat is responsible for dispatching job runs, whether triggered manually or on a schedule.
```
just because we usually talk about the user as the person who submits, aka end user, but this is not the case here

}
```

#### Job Run (Database Record)

```json
{
  "id": "a61048dd-2237-4c90-b14d-2ab9b365f487",
  "job_id": "4559172e-6194-4e75-a406-d7cdeb2c2ab1",
  "started_by_id": 2,
  "start_time": "2025-06-13T14:46:11.306367",
  "end_time": "2025-06-13T14:46:11.580854",
  "status": "success",
  "task_id": "d21ee734-139c-4ff0-85f7-3b025a19772d",
  "args": {
    "config": {
      "readers": [{ "args": { "since": "2024-05-01" } }],
      "writers": [{ "type": "names-service", "args": { "overwrite": true } }]
    }
  },
  "queue": "celery"
}
```

---

## Job Execution Lifecycle

The job system lifecycle covers the flow from job definition to execution tracking:

1. A job is defined via the UI or API, specifying a task, optional arguments, and an optional schedule.
2. The custom scheduler beat polls the database and triggers job runs when due (or immediately for manual runs).
3. The job run launches a Celery task using the specified queue and arguments.
4. During execution, any output logged using `current_app.logger` is forwarded to OpenSearch for logging.
5. Once finished, the job run's status, message, and timestamps are saved for future audit and inspection.

---

## Logging & Auditability

> If a Celery task logs via `current_app.logger`, and is invoked as a job, its logs are captured and stored with the run metadata. These logs are shown in the admin UI. All logs are stored in OpenSearch and displayed via the job run UI and API.

Reviewer: this part looks to me more as a admin panel user documentation, not the maintenance description for jobs module. For maintenance it would be more relevant to explain how the log line ends up in the report (how to call logger and when - for different log levels)

Reviewer 2: Hmmm to me this looks like on the right place mainly because we are explaining here how to create those logs, it's said in the first sentence 
> If a Celery task logs via `current_app.logger`, and is invoked as a job, its logs are captured and stored with the run metadata.

Since this is internal docs (an explanation) I don't think we need more than what is described to let the user know that they can benefit from having logs by using the app logger. I think explaining the different log levels ~is~ should be trivial to any user reading this docs. 

Explaining more about how the logging works would exceed the purpose of this doc and overwhelm the user with not essential information about the jobs. Happy to discuss more about this IRL in case I am missing something. 

P.S. Also we are already showing an example on how to log in the how to guide

- Output can be inspected per run.
- Failures and warnings are clearly highlighted.

![alt text](./img/logs.png)

---

## Error Semantics

Jobs can complete with three outcomes:

- ✅ Success (task completes with no exceptions).
- ⚠️ Partial Success (`TaskExecutionError`).
- ❌ Failure (any other exception).

> Use `TaskExecutionError` when the task completes but with non-fatal issues (e.g., partial data processed).

Reviewer 2: Good point! I will rename it in the code to `TaskExecutionPartialError` and also here, thanks!

---

## Scheduling & Concurrency

Jobs can be:

- Run immediately from the UI.

> - Scheduled with CRON or interval-based configurations via the admin panel.

Reviewer 2: IMHO it should be mentioned in different places with different purpose, in the admin user documentation it should and is mentioned with a screenshot, here is simply explained.

**Note:** There is no built-in concurrency lock. If the same job is triggered twice in parallel, both will run. Developers must ensure idempotency in task logic if required.

---

## Security Model

- Only administrators (users with access to the admin panel) can view, configure, or run jobs.
- There is currently no per-tenant job isolation.

---

## Extensibility

Developers can:

- Define new jobs by subclassing `JobType` or using the `JobType.create()` factory.
- Customize input schemas via Marshmallow.
- Use standard Celery tooling for scaling, monitoring, and worker management.

---

## Known Limitations

- No native support for job dependencies or chaining.
- No retry strategy at the job system level (rely on Celery’s retry mechanism).
- No multi-tenant separation of job visibility or logs.
- No CLI utilities for job introspection (UI/API only).

---

> ## Summary

Reviewer: do we need a summary?

Reviewer 2: I guess not, I am okay with removing
